So welcome to the last
Java session of the week.
It's maximizing-- yeah.
Maximizing Java performance for Mac OS X.
My name is Victor Hernandez.
This talk will be given by three of us,
Jim Laskey and myself.
We're from the Java runtime
technologies team.
And Gerard Ziemski, who is from the
Java platform classes team.
And we're going to be splitting
the talk into three parts.
But the goal of the overall talk is
to give you a better understanding
of why your Java application
performs as it does on Mac OS X.
Jim is going to be talking about
performance improvements that we've made,
specifically targeting the G5 processor.
Then I'll be talking about
performance opportunities that
have arrived with Java 1.4.1.
And then Gerard will be talking about
Java graphics performance on Mac OS X.
And stay tuned
specifically for that part,
because there's a lot of
great demos to be seen there.
So we've got a lot of material,
so let's get right to it.
Here's Jim.
Thanks.
So my part of the talk,
I'm going to talk specifically
about what changes were made to
the Hotspot VM to target the G5,
which was pretty exciting because
we only got to see some of these new
machines a few weeks ago and play
around with some of the prototypes.
First of all, I'll just give an overview
of my section of the talk.
I want to talk specifically about some
of the details of the G5 to give you
a sense of what sorts of things that
we could actually exploit on the G5.
Then I'll do a little performance
comparison between the G4 and the
G5 to give you some kind of sense,
as well as a benchmark can,
of what kinds of improvements you
might see in your application.
And then I'll go into some detail on some
of the changes that we made specifically
to the Java VM interpreter and the Jitsi.
And then quickly at the end,
I'll go through a couple of the changes
that we made to the Hotspot runtime.
Okay, so what does the G5
mean to Java developers?
Well, the main thing you should note is,
I guess, or you should understand,
or it should be obvious to you,
that the G5 is going to make your
application generally run faster,
and you would expect that
from a faster processor.
It's about 40% faster than the
highest-end G4 currently shipping,
faster bus structure.
There's also been some architectural
changes to the way the G5
processor works over the G4,
which actually improves the performance
of various types of operations,
and very specifically, floating point.
You'll find that floating point is
faster than that 40%, or typically
faster than that 40%, projected by just
the change in gigahertz on the machine.
Now, we could have left the VM alone
and not done anything to it,
and you would have gotten a gain
in performance running on the G5,
but we like to tinker,
and there's all these really cool
instructions on the new processor
that we wanted to take advantage of.
Specifically, there's the introduction
of 64-bit operations,
and if you have any longs or long
ints in your Java application,
we now use a much simpler and quicker set
of instructions to do those operations,
and I'll go into some detail
on what was actually done.
[Transcript missing]
And finally,
the main thing that you can walk away
from this session feeling is that
you don't have to do anything to your
application to gain these benefits,
improvements in performance.
We've modified the VM.
As soon as you run your
application on a G5,
you're going to gain all the
benefits of having 64-bit arithmetic,
the faster processing yourself.
So you have to make no
changes to your application.
Now, just to start it off,
I want to show you some comparisons
of running an application or some
applications on G4 versus G5.
This is - I'll be using a spec - sorry,
a SCIMARC.
We use several different benchmarks
internally to test various things.
We would normally have used spec-JVM,
but there's a fair use policy
which requires that you post
the scores on a public forum
before you can actually use them.
And we're still working with prototypes,
and we don't have our
final values and whatnot.
So we chose to use SCIMARC,
which is a fairly good benchmark,
and it will give you a good
sense of where we're going.
The other thing about SCIMARC is
that it's a scientific instrument.
It's a very good engineering benchmark,
which people have often said, well,
you know, like the client VM is very slow
when it comes to computation.
Well,
this SCIMARC score - the SCIMARC score
should give you a sense of where
we're headed with the computation.
CIMARC can be found at
the National Institute for
Standards and Technology website.
There's the URL.
And if you go there, there's a whole list
of current standings.
They're fairly up to date.
I think the most recent
one is May-June time frame.
If you look at the list,
you'll see us way down there somewhere.
Actually in the 61st position.
This was run by somebody back
in the fall running on 1.3.1.
1.3.1 version of the VM on a 1.2, sorry,
a 1.
and the other two are going to be
talking about the new G4 processor,
the G425 GHz dual processor G4.
So note the score there.
The score is 78253.
That is what's called
the composite score.
The side mark is actually
five separate tests,
such as fast Fourier transform,
sparse matrix multiplication,
Monte Carlo.
So that's the composite score
prepared from those five results,
and that's the composite score
which is used to actually rate
how you're doing in the side mark.
This graph will show a high-end G4,
the current high-end G4,
which is a 1.42 GHz dual
G4 against a 2 GHz dual G5.
Focus on the first column because that's
the one that the score is actually,
the main score is based on.
So currently,
our score would be around 111.
Okay, composite score.
And you can see each
of the subtests there.
I'm not sure whether there's
a normalization of these.
I haven't seen anybody actually
hitting 100 on any of those,
but that's basically what
you would find currently.
Now if you took a straight 40% increase
in performance on each of those tests,
this would be the projection
that you would get.
Okay, so we did this to sort of get a
sense of where we should be headed
once we ran it on one of these G5s.
Okay, so a score of 158.
Again,
focus on the composite score because the
other one is going to vary a little bit.
So, as I said, this would have been the
best we would have expected.
Well, we were kind of surprised
when we actually ran the test.
And we got a 232,
which is pretty significant.
So it's more than just gigahertz.
It's also the system itself and the
changes that we've made to the VM.
And here's an overlay of the projections
just to show you where we're at.
So our score is basically
more than doubled on the G5.
So where does this put us?
Well, if we were to do this today,
this would put us about 12th position.
And what's interesting is that this
is up in the high end there with all
the high IBM servers running 3 GHz,
and we're running a client VM.
So that gives you a sense of
the power of what the G5 is,
and also the potential that
we could have as we make
further improvements on the VM.
Okay, so let's go over some of the
changes that took place in
the interpreter and the JITC.
We enhanced them with G5 instructions.
We can do this because the interpreter,
the JITC compiler code generation,
and also the runtime are all constructed
on the fly when you launch the VM.
So this gives us an opportunity to choose
which instructions that we want to apply.
So if we ran on a G3 versus G4,
we would choose different instructions.
If we were running on a single
processor or a double processor,
we would choose different instructions.
And now that we're running on a G5,
we can actually choose
64-bit instructions.
So Java long in support is
now using 64-bit operations,
and I'll show some of
the details of that.
There's also been improvement in
float and double support using some of
the new floating point instructions.
And they're not actually
new instructions,
they're just instructions
that are only made available
because of the 64-bit support.
64-bit support.
So let's talk a little bit about
the details of what 64-bit means.
In a G4, or G3 for that matter,
everything that goes through the
processor has to go through in 32 bits.
That's because the data bus and the width
of the registers is only 32 bit wide.
So if you wanted to do an operation
on a 64 bit long integer value,
you would require two registers
to deal with each of the
operands and with the result.
In this case, if we had foo = x + y,
foo would require two
registers to hold the result.
In this case, in this example, R3 and R4,
we'd also need two
registers for x and for y,
so we'd need six registers just
to perform a long add operation,
or a long subtract operation.
In the G5 world,
our registers are 64-bit wide.
We can still treat them as
though they're 32-bit wide,
and some operations still
deal with them as 32-bit wide,
but the long integer operations,
we can deal with them as full 64-bit.
So in the previous example where
we had foo equals x plus y,
foo only needs,
the result only needs one register.
And x and y only need one register each,
so we cut down the number of registers
that are needed for each operation,
and that makes more available
for other operations.
So we get a win from the
reduction or the lack of,
sorry, the general win by having more
registers available for operations.
So let's look at the specific
operations that we can improve on.
So in your Java code you have
an expression along X equals Y.
On a G4, this would actually require four
steps in order to perform this.
We need two steps to load
each half of the 64-bit value,
the high 32 bits, then the low 32 bits.
And then we need two steps to
store those out back into memory.
So in the 32-bit world,
we almost always have to use at least
two instructions where one would do.
And the G5, we only have one instruction
for each of those.
So one instruction for load,
one instruction for store.
This is also used for moving data.
We have a 64-bit data bus,
we can get better throughput
through the system.
So when we're doing memory copies,
we're also getting
performance boosts there.
Let's look at some of the
simple operations like add,
subtract, and negate.
Again, because we only have
32-bit wide registers,
we have to do everything
in two steps on the G4.
So in this case,
if we want to add two long ints,
we have to add the low
halves of the two operands,
bring the carry forward,
and then add the two halves
and add the carry in.
So that would be the two steps
that are highlighted here.
I've thrown in the load operations
as well to give you a sense of that.
Well, it's not just the operation itself,
it's also the things
that go on around it.
So it takes eight
instructions to perform that.
On the G5, it only takes one
instruction to do the add,
and again, each of the loads only
takes one instruction,
the store only takes one instruction.
So we've cut the number of
instructions required in half,
and you can think in terms
of fewer instructions,
faster code.
Now the more interesting things,
and this is the most trouble for
us in implementing the Java VM,
has been dealing with longs and some
of these more complex operations like
multiply and divide and remainder
and shifts and even comparisons.
They can take many instructions and long
and divide can literally take hundreds
of instructions or hundreds of steps
in order to complete the operation.
Remainder, just a few more.
Shifts can take eight.
Comparisons can take up to 12.
They're fairly expensive operations.
Each of these have been reduced to
one single operation and I'll take
multiply as the simplest example.
On the G4, to do a long int multiply,
it takes six steps to do the
cross multiply of the low and
high parts of the operands.
On the G5, it only takes one instruction.
So you can see where this is going,
is that if you have a lot of long
int computation in your code,
where it took many steps before,
it's only going to take a few now.
Let's take a look at float.
When I say float,
I mean float and double.
In the G5 implementation of the Java VM,
we have taken advantage of some
of the newer instructions that
can convert longs to double,
and doubles back to long,
and same is true with float.
In the G4 implementation,
it has to make a library call,
which takes several hundreds of steps.
So it speeds up the performance
of casting or conversion
of longs to doubles.
There's also been some
improvements in the float and
double bit extraction routines,
such as double to long bits.
These are used primarily when
you're converting doubles
to strings and back again.
The most interesting of
the changes is square root.
On the G5,
there's a built-in square root function.
On the G4, the square root is implemented
as a trig library routine,
and it can take several steps.
It's in the order of about
40 steps to complete.
So what I did was I took a little
micro benchmark where I'm iterating
through 100 million data points and
applying a square root to each of the
data points and producing a result.
And just to make it interesting,
I took a little bit more complex
operation where I had 100 million
xy points on a coordinate plane,
and I wanted to compute the distance,
so it's a little bit more
complicated equation.
And just to see how long it would
take to do on each of the processors.
The first processor is the
G4 running at 1.42 GHz.
So it takes about 12 seconds
to do all those computations,
and 13.5 for the distance formula.
Now if I was just to take a
straight port over and use
the library routine on the G5,
it would be reduced to 7.7
seconds and 8.1 seconds.
And this is actually better than 30% of
the projected time that it should take.
So the floating point
processing is better on the G5,
and you're going to get a better result.
On the G5, running with the square root
instruction built into the
code or inlined in the code,
it only takes two seconds.
So you've got, say,
six times improvement in performance.
This is a micro benchmark.
It's just going to give you a sense
of the increase in performance
of the square root itself.
So your actual example may
take a little bit longer,
but it gives you a sense of the
magnitude of the improvement there.
Finally,
I just want to quickly run through
some of the changes to the runtime.
In a 32-bit world,
we have a little problem
where two threads may want
to share a long int value,
say a static or a field in an object.
And while they're
writing to that long int,
the upper and lower halves of
those values might get slammed
by one or the other process,
depending on how the thread
switching is going on.
To avoid that problem,
you can annotate your field
with the volatile keyword.
And what that does is forces the VM to
coordinate how that field is accessed,
and make sure that we don't
run into that problem.
In the G4, we did a little fudge using
a 64-bit double register,
and using that as an atomic access,
and copying it through some memory,
and so on and so forth.
So it took several steps
in order to make that work.
In the G5,
64-bit loads and stores are atomic,
so you don't have that problem.
So there's no overhead when you're
dealing with volatile fields on the G5.
One of the problems that the G5
introduces is the fact that the
hardware itself is a little bit
more complex and has more stages
when it's doing its computation.
This is where it gets its speed.
So when you're running
on a dual processor,
there needs to be some coordination
on how memory is being accessed.
In the G4 world, we use something called
the sync instruction,
and this allowed the two processors
in the dual processor environment
to sync up the data that's shared
between the two processors.
But the problem with the sync instruction
is that it somewhat freezes the state
of the processors until they're both
coordinated before it continues on.
So there's a bit of an impact there,
and sometimes it can be
actually fairly serious.
With the introduction of the G5,
they brought in a new instruction
called Lightweight Sync,
which doesn't require as much
handshaking between the processors to
determine whether the data is in sync.
And we use these when we're
doing memory allocation,
when two threads are trying to
allocate memory at the same time,
or when you're using a
synchronization of an object.
And finally,
the last major change that we
made in the runtime to deal with
the G5 is atomic long access.
There's a class in SunMisc
called AtomicLongCS - sorry,
CSImpl, which allows you to do
atomic access of long values.
And this is primarily used
in the net operations,
like when you're setting up
sockets and so on and so forth.
In the G4, we had to actually use
full Java synchronization,
and we just used the Java implementation
to provide the synchronization.
So we lock out the access to
that particular object field,
and then we make the assignment
and release it through
normal synchronization.
On the G5,
we use lightweight load and reserve,
which is an instruction
that we use for the G5.
It allows us to reserve
access to that word,
and it can be done fairly quickly.
So in summary, the Java that 1.14,
or sorry, 1.4.1 that ships with the G5s,
once they start shipping,
will automatically adapt
to the G5 processor.
And we're only going to be shipping one
version of the VM from that point on.
It's not one that runs on the G4,
one that runs on G5.
It's one that runs on all
platforms but adapts to the G5.
And this is one of the great
things about the Hotspot VM.
You're going to get
significant performance changes
somewhat across the board,
specifically in floating point.
That's the main thing.
If you're doing scientific computing,
you're going to see bigger wins there.
And then also with the
long int arithmetic,
if you're using it.
The main thing that I want to point
out is that you don't have to make
any code changes to your own code.
The VM does the adoption for you.
This is where you're one up on all
the C and Objective C programmers.
Because if they want to run on G5 and
take advantage of the G5 processor,
they're going to have to recompile
their application and they're
going to have to ship a separate
version of their application
for the G5 and one for the G4.
So Java is automatically going
to take advantage of that.
Okay, and that's all I have to say,
I guess.
Okay, Victor?
There you go.
So for those of you that don't think
in terms of bits and instructions,
we'll take it at a higher level now.
My name is Victor Hernandez,
in case you don't remember.
And here we go.
So basically what I'm going to be
talking about is updates to Hotspot
that have been made with Java 1.4.1.
Specifically,
one of the features that we've added
in being able to optimize your code,
and that's specifically
aggressive inlining.
And also,
one performance opportunity that you can
take advantage of yourself in Java 1.4.1,
which is the new IO APIs.
And finally,
I'm going to kind of wrap it up
with a bunch of conclusions on
tips that you can take advantage
of to improve your hot methods.
Okay, so one of the performance
bottlenecks that has plagued Java,
well, I don't know if plagued,
but that Java has encountered
since the early days,
is the fact that there's a
large cost in the overhead of
actually invoking a Java method.
So our opportunity to minimize that
cost is actually done by dynamically
inlining the method calls done by your
method when we compile your method.
What is inlining?
That should be pretty straightforward,
but I'll give a quick example.
Here you've got average and sum,
average call sum.
Of course,
this could avoid the call to sum if it
just simply did the A plus B itself,
but of course you don't want to do
that in your code because that limits
the reusability of that method.
Good thing is that we're
able to do that for you.
You don't need to change your code,
we just do it for you on the fly.
In 1.3.1,
there was limited ability to do inlining.
We were able to inline your
accessor methods to your fields.
We were able to inline your call to
create new instances of your objects.
And we were able to
inline certain intrinsics.
Intrinsics being methods that we actually
don't need to look at the bytecodes
to know what it's supposed to do.
We actually know what it's
supposed to do and actually have a
finely tuned implementation of it.
For example, sine, cosine,
also the identity function.
And then also,
but one of the main issues with
inlining in Java 1.3.1 was the
fact that we were actually not
able to inline virtual methods.
Why are virtual methods
difficult to inline?
Well,
the reason they're difficult to inline
is because there could be possible
multiple implementations of that method.
When you actually go to the invocation,
so we don't know which
implementation to actually inline.
So how do we go about inlining
those virtual methods?
We do that with a technique
called class hierarchy analysis.
The goal of class hierarchy analysis is
to determine if a method is monomorphic.
And a method is monomorphic if
there is only one implementation
of that particular virtual method
that has actually been loaded.
If we know there's only
one that has been loaded,
and you go to call it,
that's got to be the one.
and Hotspot 141 attempts to aggressively
inline all monomorphic methods.
That's the main feature
we've added beyond 1.3.1.
So what are the benefits of this?
Well, clearly the fact that now we can
actually inline virtual methods.
There are certain situations where those
methods actually don't get inlined,
and even in that case then,
we can avoid the virtual table
lookup when invoking that method,
because we know that there's only
one entry in the virtual table.
This also provides us the ability
to do a faster implementation
of certain bytecodes,
because the class hierarchy analysis has
a data structure which actually tells
us the full hierarchy information of
all the classes that have been loaded.
So when you're doing things
like instance of or check cast,
which are bytecodes used when casting
your objects between various classes,
we can actually use that data structure,
and it actually performs a lot faster.
OK, so what is another performance issue
that has affected Java in the past?
Well,
this one actually has two parts to it.
One is the fact that if you ever
wanted to operate on native data
structures from your Java methods,
you actually had to have them
residing in the Java heap.
Why would you actually need to have
native data structures in your Java heap?
Well, if you ever want to interact
with any system APIs,
you actually need to have those
data structures to pass down once
you drop down into native methods.
That adds the other heavy cost,
which is the fact that those
JNI transitions to do those method calls,
the native method calls,
are quite expensive.
I mean, in the previous section where
I was talking about the inlining,
we're trying to minimize
the amount of method calls.
And those method calls are even pretty
quick compared to these JNI transitions.
Not only that, but these JNI transitions
definitely cannot be inlined at
all because we're crossing ABIs,
and we don't totally control a lot of the
issues between calling from Java to C.
But those JNI transitions are
still necessary as of Java 1.3.1.
The other thing to keep in mind is
that once you have all those native
data structures in the Java heap,
they actually need to be copied
around during garbage collection.
And yet they don't contain
any actual Java pointers,
which the garbage collection
algorithm needs to take track of.
So what is our approach at
actually improving this bottleneck?
We want to remove this JNI dependency
altogether by giving you the ability
to actually access that native
memory from your Java methods.
You might be familiar with this.
This is basically the new
IO APIs that were provided in 1.4.1.
They're available in
the Java and IO package.
And there's basically a buffer
class for every single one
of the Java scalar types,
and also for the actual byte scalar type.
Actually,
all operations happen at the byte level,
even though that's not a Java scalar.
But you can actually cast to int buffer,
to long buffer,
and actually operate at the Java level.
And one of the things you need
to keep in mind here is that
even though the goal is to have
Direct access to native buffers that
are not located inside of the Java heap,
you can actually trick yourself
into still basically having a
copy residing in the Java heap,
accessing that and have it being
copied over outside of the heap,
which even though it might be
improved performance as before,
since you don't have to drop down
into a JNI native method to do that,
it still is an added overhead,
and you need to be careful about that.
There's a few other
issues I want to bring up.
This is a pretty straightforward
code example that shows an allocation
of a byte buffer of size 400,
and you're basically zero
filling it with a for loop.
One of the things that actually you need
to be aware of right here is that that
for loop is not as optimal as it can be,
because the call to the put method
does not get in line because it's
not determined to be monomorphic.
This is a caveat of the actual class
hierarchy of the Java and IO package,
and it affects all your
calls to get and put.
In the case of byte buffer,
if you're doing something like this,
there is actually one way
you can get around it.
And that's actually just simply
by using a map byte buffer.
The map byte buffer get and
put methods are actually
determined to be monomorphic,
and they get in line.
But you need to keep that in mind.
And this is something that we're
going to be tracking for in the
future to see if this can be improved.
So how do you actually do high
level I/O with the new I/O?
That's using Java and I/O channels,
found in the Java and
I/O channels package.
And the main thing that it provides
beyond what was available in
traditional Java I/O as of Java 1.3.1
is the ability to do non-blocking
and interruptible operations.
No longer is there any need to
actually have one thread per socket.
That's the thing of the past.
The other thing that it
provides is actually it provides
improved file system support,
gives you a lot more of the system
level primitives that you would come to
expect from a robust operating system.
Things like file locking and
also memory mapped files.
Just like in the case where you needed
to make sure that you had a direct
buffer sitting behind your native buffer,
this is another example where
you actually not only have
access to direct memory,
but you actually are accessing
the memory mapped file itself.
stuff.
So let me go into a little more
detail about the socket channel.
I don't want this to be a-- I'm not
going to go into enough depth for this
to be a tutorial on this sort of thing,
but I do want to bring up a few issues
that tutorials might miss on occasion.
This is an example of how to
create a server socket channel
and bind it to a particular
address for it to be listening on.
One of the things is that, by default,
it is not set to be non-blocking.
So you actually have to do that
by calling configure blocking
and passing it a value of false.
You can-- it's a pretty
straightforward thing,
but it can be missed.
And it definitely makes
a huge difference.
And then actually,
how do you actually communicate
with your clients using this model?
You use the selector model,
which you might be familiar with
from the programming patterns.
You can see in the code right here,
basically what you're doing is you're
registering for a particular key,
and then once you've done that,
you can basically iterate
over all of your clients who
communicate to you via keys,
and who pass the new channel you were
communicating with them with in a...
In a big wild loop, if you want,
by iterating over all of the keys.
And that way you're abstracting
away all of the different sockets
that you're actually talking to,
instead of doing the traditional having
to block until your client talks back
to you along that particular socket.
One of the things to keep in mind
is that the socket channel that is
actually returned each of the times you
access one of these keys is different
than the one you had originally.
So if you want to continue
the non-blocking I/O,
you actually need to state that you're
doing non-blocking I/O once again with
the configure blocking set to false.
Okay, so what do you need to keep
in mind when using NIO?
Well, it's definitely not free.
The cost of allocating those native
buffers is definitely much larger
than allocating the Java arrays.
It's pretty hard to reach our performance
of allocating Java arrays because
we actually do a very good job at
doing that as quickly as possible.
The other thing to keep in mind
is that the get-put methods of the
native buffers are not inlined.
You can use the trick to get at
least that fixed for a few cases,
but there's nothing you can do
for int buffer and for some of
the other scalar buffer types.
But the cost definitely out - sorry,
the gains definitely outweigh the cost in
the cases where I've been talking about,
where you have heavy use of system
APIs with native data structures.
One of the good examples of actually
taking advantage of that win is
actually in the re-architecture of the
AWT done by our team for Java 1.4.1.
We actually took advantage of the new
IO API to talk to core graphics and
minimize the number of JNI transitions.
Basically, we told the classes team,
try to minimize JNI transitions
as much as possible,
and they did that as much as they could.
You definitely see the
performance improvement there,
and we're hoping that the shared classes
on the whole will be seeing more use
of new IO wherever that can be done.
in the future.
The other thing also is clearly if you
have server I/O with multiple clients,
you definitely want to
be using this because the
overhead is definitely costly.
So,
what can you take away from all of this?
Well, the main thing you need to keep
in mind with the server I/O is
just simply use it in those cases.
And with what I told you about inlining,
what you need to do actually
is maximize the opportunities
where we can inline your methods.
This is mainly important
in your hot methods.
When you do a profile,
you want to figure out what the
methods that you're mainly calling are,
and make sure that the hottest method,
all of the things that it's calling
are hopefully being inlined.
It only can be done at a high level.
There are actually no flags to have this
notified to you if your methods aren't
being inlined and that sort of thing.
But the general rules of
thumb are definitely if all
those methods are small,
that helps because we have a
certain limit at which point we
bail on any future inlines in the
method we're trying to compile.
Feel free to use accessor methods.
Those have been inlined
definitely since Java 1.3.1.
Also, there's no need to use the
final qualifier on your methods.
That's superficial for
performance tuning.
It's definitely not superficial
for object oriented programming,
but we don't particularly
get any benefit out of that.
And also, keep in mind that a lot of the
JDK methods do get inlined,
so you can keep that in mind if that's a
lot of what your HOT methods are doing.
There are a few things that
we're still unable to inline,
and you've got to keep that in mind.
Mainly synchronized methods,
obviously large methods,
and if you have an exception
handler in your method,
that can cause it not to be inlined.
So keep that in mind.
The last tips I want to leave you with
are ones I always like to reiterate,
which are things that still
live on from the days of Java 1.
Avoid object pools.
There's absolutely no need
for them in modern Java.
Our new is completely fast.
It's also inlined.
We also have thread local allocation.
So now there's minimized contention
between multiple threads allocating
in the Java heap at the same time.
And we also, I mean,
we have precise garbage collection.
So let us do the work for you
in terms of figuring out when
an object needs to go away.
You don't need to take care of it in
terms of the object pool and all that.
And also, avoid programming by exception.
There definitely are situations where
you want to program by exceptions.
There's the case where you have, like,
you want to go down a tree and
then go all the way back up to
certain branches in the tree.
Sure.
But Hotspot is definitely not optimized
to compile those cases as well.
For example,
it can cause inlining to be prevented.
And also, the actual creation of the
exceptions are expensive,
but that creation only happens if
the exception is actually thrown.
So, hope you gave away some
tips for your application,
and now I'll bring up Gerard.
Hello, welcome.
My name is Gerard Ziemski.
I'm an engineer on Java Classes team.
And I'll be talking to you
about graphics performance.
First,
I'll give you a short introduction of
the state of Java graphics on Mac OS X.
Then I'll give you a few actual
tips and techniques on what you
can do to your application to
make your Java app run faster.
And finally,
we'll have some cool demos to show you.
Java 1.3.1.
One really interesting thing that
we've done there was a Java 2D hardware
accelerated implementation
that set on top of OpenGL.
That was really terrific,
terrific implementation.
It was fast.
It was incredibly fast.
However, the problem with it was
that when it worked,
it worked.
And it worked only 90% of the time.
And to get the rest,
10%, is really difficult for us.
We were making strides.
We're continuing.
And we're making progress.
However, we really could not nail
down the correctness.
So when we moved to Java 1.4.1,
we completely re-heterotectured our code.
We moved from Carbon to Cocoa.
And the lessons that we
learned in 1.3.1 was,
first of all,
if we cannot do hardware acceleration,
we need to have something
we can fall back on.
And that is something
called a software renderer.
So when we moved to 1.4.1, we decided,
let's start, let's nail it down.
Let's have terrific software
implementation as far as
correctness is concerned.
Then, in the future,
once we have that done,
we'll be looking for new technologies
emerging right here within Apple.
And then we'll evaluate them.
And then we'll see which
one works for us the best.
And then we'll adopt that technology.
So we are right now, at this point,
we are still at the transition
point where we're in 1.4.1.
We have brand new code.
There is not even one line of
code that we share with 1.3.1.
It's brand new.
Everything is written from scratch.
But we want to nail
the correctness first.
And, of course,
we are keeping our eyes open on
what is going on around us and
what technologies we can use later.
So in 1.4.1, the Java update that
you guys have access to,
first of all,
our priorities were correctness.
Second,
we also didn't really want to neglect
the Java graphics optimizations.
As you all know,
1.4.1 is not a speed demon as
far as graphics is concerned.
So we worked on really on very
basic architectural optimization
techniques that we could put in there.
And right now,
we came up with three of them.
That's lazy drawing,
lazy pixel conversion,
and lazy state management.
What lazy drawing is about
is we simply collect all your
primitives that you want to draw.
We put them aside in a queue in a cache.
And when the time comes to draw them
to the screen or into your image,
it's only then when we
transition from Java,
we go to the native,
then we process that queue.
The good thing about this lazy drawing
implementation that we have right
now is that it's future compatible.
Whatever technology
we choose to use next,
this lazy drawing implementation
will work with it.
And we work with Core Graphics guys,
and we make sure that whatever we do
with our lazy drawing optimization
will not break them in any way.
Second, lazy pixel conversion.
There are certain image types
that Java provides the access to
that are not supported natively.
So what that means is if we want
to do something with that image,
the pixels are in format that
are not understood natively.
We have to convert them.
If we didn't do this optimization,
drawing of images or drawing
into images would be terribly,
terribly slow.
So what lazy pixel conversion is,
is simply a technique of converting
the pixels only when it's necessary.
And then, thirdly, lazy state management.
A graphics context has multiple
different states that you can set.
Transformations, color.
And what this is about,
this optimization techniques
will simply let us set only those
states that have actually changed.
We are not quite done
with this optimization.
We are only part way.
So unfortunately, at this point,
whenever you change most
of the graphic states,
we have to slam all the other
ones as well at that time.
That is terribly inefficient,
but we are working on that.
So here is one benchmark,
micro benchmark, to show you.
This one,
the scores show simply basically
performance of lazy drawing optimization.
So what you have in your hands
with our initial one-for-one
release was the base of 100,
and what you have right now,
you have 175 score,
which is 75% increase.
That's not too bad.
We're not done with this by any means.
And second, Robocode.
That's real world application.
There's interesting story behind this.
At the time when we
were working on 1.3.1,
Robocode was running pretty darn slow.
And we went to the developer,
and I think we made a mistake,
because we told him, look,
the image format that you're
using is not fast with our
current implementation in 1.3.1.
Why don't you use the image
format that we support natively,
and we'll speed up your application?
Well, they listened to us.
They changed it, and yes,
they saw the performance
improvement in 1.3.1.
However, when we moved to 1.1,
underneath we used
different implementation,
different techniques,
different technology.
And the Robocode score plummeted down.
The problem was that the
image format was hard coded.
So right now what we tried to do was,
there are two things that
went wrong in Robocode.
First of all, our lazy pixel conversion
had not very efficient
and the rest of the team.
We're getting much closer to full
frame rates that I've seen before.
And if you remember on the 1.4.1 release,
we were getting about
four frames a second.
And that's because we were doing all
that conversion right on the fly.
And now, if I just start this battle up,
we should be getting something closer
to around 30 or so frames per second.
We're getting about 32 and
we may even get above there.
Right now it's hard locked to 30.
So if I go up to maximum,
we might even break 30 and get some more.
But we're right around 30.
And you can see here that we're not
even using both of the processors.
And there's something else going
on here that you don't actually
know is that we're running one
of the really cool demos in the
background that you'll see later in
the session on this same machine.
So it's actually got a lot of extra time.
I could start my word processor and
we'd still keep our 30 frames a second.
And I also like to do this.
Let's restart it again and
turn on my favorite option,
which is showing where
the robots are scanning.
[Transcript missing]
And the future.
First of all,
we have lazy state management to finish.
This should give us
pretty nice improvement.
Then there's more
optimization that we can do.
We have already tried implementing some
of our lazy pixel conversion filters
using the multiprocessors that are now
available in many of our computers.
And we're not done with it.
We're just testing, playing around,
seeing how much improvement
that can give us.
But that's one of the
things we're looking at.
Also, all the back optimizations.
So there's still quite a bit,
quite a few technologies that we can
use to make Java graphics go in faster.
And then we are talking
to science engineers.
When we are working on our
lazy drawing optimization,
we actually went to them.
We went to Java 2D graphics engineers,
and we told them, listen, guys,
this is what we're thinking of doing.
What do you think?
Is it going to work?
Is it not going to work?
Do you have any other
cool ideas that we may do?
And they loved our ideas, and they said,
yeah, go for it.
We don't even have it.
So we've done something that
they wished they had it.
So we are definitely doing
some interesting things.
[Transcript missing]
They're looking into OpenGL.
They're looking into API,
2D API that sits on top of OpenGL.
That's very similar to the hardware
acceleration that we had in 1.3.1,
but better, because we are not the
only client of that.
We don't have to support it.
It would be system-wide,
and if they come through,
if they have that working,
then that's definitely something
that we would like our code work
with them and take advantage of that.
So we'll be looking very closely at
what CoreGraphics guys will be doing,
and certainly taking advantage
of any code technologies
that they have to offer.
If there's one thing that I would like
you guys to take out of this session is
What to do about the images.
If you have to draw into buffered image,
how do you determine what is the correct,
what is the fastest image
type that you guys should use?
And, you know,
And this is the most important thing.
Please do not hard code
proper image types.
That's an example of a code
that would be hard coding it.
What you can do is you
can ask the system.
for Compatible Image.
Now, if you do this,
then no matter what technology
we'll use in the future,
you're guaranteed that you will be
given a buffered image type that
will be the fastest on our platform.
That is very, very important.
And one more point here.
If you have a choice,
you have the option,
ask for a volatile image.
This will be - will have them
part of Accelerated soon,
hopefully.
So if you have the choice,
get a volatile image.
Now, there's one misconception
among some of you with respect
to indexed color formats.
On other platforms,
they're very fast and they're
also conserved memory.
So using indexed format is
a way of compressing the
pixel data using less memory.
Unfortunately, on Mac OS X,
they're not supported natively.
So what we have to do internally
to support that image format is to
create brand new buffer just to have
those pixels converted in a format
that we can understand natively.
And then that's the way we can use them.
So indexed color format images on
Mac OS X do not use less memory.
On the contrary,
they use more and they're slower.
If you have to use them,
you have no choice.
But if you do need to use them,
use other image formats.
And it's very easy, very often,
for you just to see.
You don't need to do a lot.
Just change the buffer image format type.
And second, and that's very important,
the most optimal image
format is not hard coded.
It can change.
It can vary from machine to machine.
If we were to move again to a
technology that uses OpenGL,
that is very dependent on a video
graphics card you have in your system.
Also, it is very important then to us
to see what is the resolution
of the monitor you're running,
what is the depth of
screen you're running on.
So there will not be one and only
one image format that is the best,
the fastest.
It will change.
And you need to keep that in mind
if you're writing for Mac OS X.
Now, if you really need to know what
are the natively supported image
formats at this particular time,
and this may not hold even
in the next few months,
this may change, but at this point,
only four image types
are supported natively.
Those are the fastest.
And those are the image types
into which you can draw,
which means they're at the destination.
You can create a context
by perfect image,
create context, get context,
get graphics.
So those only four are
natively supported.
Those are the pastest at this point.
If you need to draw an
image somewhere else,
meaning the image you have, the pixels,
are source,
then the natively supported image formats
are a separate set of the destination.
We have one more image format that
we can support natively as a source,
and that is ARGB alpha non-premultiplied.
That is, by the way,
the image format that Robocode uses.
And we have added special optimization
in our lazy pixel conversion that
actually allows the pixels to
know whether they're in native
format or they're in Java format.
And then based on that,
we have two different CG image revs.
And then we can just switch
very fast between two of them.
And we can choose the
pixels that are up to date.
And here is some techniques
for the rendering.
This is important in
our platform as well.
What we have missing,
one of our technologies
that we had in 1.3.1,
allowed you to draw very...
[Transcript missing]
Now,
this is for those of you who really need
the fastest access to the image pixels,
for whatever reason.
If you're writing an image
manipulation program like Photoshop,
something like that,
then if an image is supported natively,
unfortunately for you,
there's no way to determine
whether a certain image type
is supported natively or not.
It may change in the future.
It's constant.
Only at this point, it may change.
However,
if for some reason you need to do that,
and you know the image
format is supported natively,
what you can do is grab pixels
directly from data buffer.
On a non-natively supported image,
you do not want to
access pixels directly.
If you do, we have to turn lazy pixel
conversion optimization off,
because the time,
the second you touch pixels,
those pixels are stolen.
You can have access to them.
We do not know when you look
at them or when you use them.
We have to do the conversion from
native to Java every single operation.
So you do not want to
touch pixels directly on a
non-natively supported image.
So go through graphics object
and draw to it that way.
Auto optimisation tips and techniques.
This comes from my old
All the work I've done on application
was DNA sequencing application,
and when I was trying to optimize it,
here are the few things that I found
that helped that application.
First of all, avoid creating new objects
in your paint method.
Obvious, this applies to all platforms.
Don't create new fonts.
Don't create rectangles
if you need to use them,
and manipulate them later
on for determining the clip.
Don't create any objects in paint method.
Use simple primitive instead of shapes.
We have done our lazy
drawing optimization,
actually attempts to do
that automatically for you.
However, it would be,
if you have the choice on Mac OS,
then it is faster to drop the
primitives directly using full reg 00,
you know, xy, width, height,
as opposed to creating a rect 2D object.
Use polyline instead of
drawing lines one at a time.
It simply avoids the crossing of
the native from Java to native.
And it's simply faster with current
core graphics implementation
because we can build a complex
path if you have a polyline.
Otherwise,
we have to draw lines one at a time,
and core graphics is not
terribly good at that.
This will not apply
probably to most of you,
but if you have a limited alphabet
and you know you will not be
drawing complex characters,
so if you're writing on text
editor kind of application,
this will not apply.
However, if you have a limited alphabet,
say, for letters,
then maybe you can do that.
And the optimization
is you can use bytes,
not chars.
Chars are 16-bit,
and we do not know whether it could
be a Unicode character or not.
If it is,
then we have to go through this more
complex path to draw Unicode characters.
If it's a byte, then we know it falls
within the NASKE range,
and then we can just bypass some of
the complex text drawing routines,
and we can go straight to
Core Graphics to blit those characters.
Use double buffering for your static
portions of your applications.
That is - that will
apply to all platforms.
And we have added, with this release,
we have added tons of runtime
options for you guys to play around,
to turn them on and off.
You can turn off the optimizations
that we provided for you guys.
You can turn on and off rendering
of lines or rectangles or shapes.
You can use all of those runtime
options to narrow down and to
find out what is the problem with
your application if you have one.
So now for the demo, I'd like to welcome
Ken Russell from Sun Microsystem.
A couple of weeks ago at Java 1,
Sun announced the new
Java Gaming Initiative.
And one of the products of this
initiative is a new OpenGL binding
for the Java platform called JOGL.
And JOGL is open source,
and you can download the source
code right now on java.net.
So just go to java.net,
search for the project name,
and you can get it.
And thanks to Gerard and
a couple of all-nighters,
JOGL is now running on OS X.
It's running on the developer preview
that you've got with your 10.3 CDs,
and it's not going to run on any
earlier versions of Java for OS X,
so keep that in mind.
But going forward, it will work,
and it will be fast and robust.
So we've got a couple of
very cool demos to show you.
This one is very special.
This is Doby the dog,
and Doby was developed by the Synthetic
Characters Group at the MIT Media Lab.
And Doby is completely autonomous.
He perceives his environment.
He has his own internal
motivations and desires.
And you can actually train Doby in the
same way that you would train a real dog.
You can sort of lure him around
and show him new motions to do.
You can reward him by giving him
a little click with a clicker.
You can, in some sense,
scold him by ignoring him when he
does a behavior that you don't like.
And basically,
Doby represents -- or at least it's a
safe thing to say that Doby is pretty
much a state of the art in interactive
animated characters that can learn.
And you can read more about Doby in
the paper on him in SIGGRAPH 2002.
Now, Doby, it turns out,
is written almost entirely in
the Java programming language,
with a little bit of native
code around the outside to
get the custom device inputs.
He uses some of the more
advanced OpenGL techniques,
like vertex shaders,
to do the shadow that you see here,
and the cartoon-like shading
around the edges of the dog.
This demo runs at over 50 frames
a second on a dual processor G4.
And I should mention that the
synthetic characters group is
a big OS X development house,
and so they do all of their development
at this point with Java on OS X.
This is the first demo that
they've actually had to slow down,
because it was running too fast.
So it's actually slowed
down to 30 frames a second,
and because the G4s are so fast,
the G5s will be even better.
So we're not actually going
to train Doby right now,
he's just going through his paces,
but you can sort of see what's going on.
There's skinning going on,
there's action selection,
and this is running on top
of the JOGL binding for OS X.
And also notice the CPU usage
in the bottom left corner.
There's almost nothing going on in there,
everything goes through
Video Graphics Card.
Yep.
So, cool stuff.
Okay.
Okay,
so now here's another demonstration.
This is a demo by NVIDIA Corporation that
we've ported from C to Java.
Okay,
now this is not real-time ray tracing.
This is using a couple of tricks
to get hardware acceleration
for this technique of rendering
glass with prismatic effects.
So there is actually in some sense,
many of you I'm sure are familiar
with the technique of ray tracing
where you send a ray of light
out the camera into the scene.
And that is in fact being done at
every vertex on this wireframe model,
but the trick is that it's being
done on the graphics card by
what's called a vertex shader,
or a vertex program.
This is a tiny little assembly
language program that is actually
uploaded to the graphics card when
the demo starts up that tells it,
okay, we're going to take the camera's
position and the vertex's position
and the surface normal and figure out
where should the reflected ray go,
and where should the refracted
ray go through the surface normal.
And then it's going to
go through the object.
And basically it looks up in
the surrounding environment,
this street scene,
where's the right texture coordinate
for where the ray intersects the world.
And basically what it's doing is
distorting the background texture in
such a way on a per vertex basis that it
looks like the thing's made out of glass.
So it's not doing it at every pixel,
it's doing it at every vertex,
but it's close enough that
it's really indistinguishable.
Another cool trick here is that
you notice that we just talked
about the fact that the camera is
not actually doing the same thing.
So it's not doing it at every pixel,
it's doing it at every vertex,
but it's close enough that
it's really indistinguishable.
Another cool trick here is that
you notice that we just talked
about the fact that the camera is
not actually doing the same thing.
turned off the fringe effects,
what's going on is that we're rendering
the scene three different times,
each with a slightly different
refractive index for the glass.
And that makes the refracted ray go
into a slightly different position in
the surrounding environment each time.
Then those three things
are added together,
again, on the graphics card,
and you get the -- what
basically looks like a prism.
So, I'd like to point out that
the same binary for this
demonstration runs on OS X,
it runs on Linux, and it runs on Windows.
And it runs at 100% of the
speed of the analogous C++ code.
Remember, this was a port,
not a new demo.
So, basically,
we are here with respect to
OpenGL performance in Java,
and it's running on OS X.
It looks great.
So, go out and develop cool stuff.
We don't have Java 3D for you guys yet,
but if you really need
to use 3D graphics,
then please use Joggle.
And some of you might be
familiar with Geo4Java,
which is very similar product technology,
also Open Geo binding.
Geo4Java doesn't support the
latest Open Geo standard,
doesn't give you access to pixel shaders.
Joggle does.
So if you want to have 3D
graphics on Mac OS X using Java,
you can.